( calling people to prayer,
in Arabic )
[Captioning sponsored
by VIEWERS LIKE YOU]
KINGSLEY:
In the city of Istanbul
the soaring domes and minarets
reveal the culmination
of a thousand years
of empire and faith.
Here, in the 16th century
Islam would be transformed
into a world power,
ambitious and imperial.
Led by a dynasty of conquerors
their absolute authority
would establish a Muslim domain
more far-reaching
than any that had come before.
( explosion )
KINGSLEY:
They would take their empire
to the very gates of Europe
inspired
by their greatest leader
Suleyman the Magnificent.
It was an age of regal splendor
when Islam
and the great Ottoman Empire
would rise
to stake their boldest claim
for power, for conquest,
for destiny.
The Ottoman Turks began
as a nomadic people
from the Steppe
beyond the Aral Sea.
For centuries, they had wandered
present-day Turkey
looking for new pasturelands.
( horse neighing )
Muslim sultans had enlisted them
as mercenaries
to fight off the Mongol hordes.
But in the upheaval
following the Mongol invasion
the Turks began to stake out
their own territorial claims.
From their ranks emerged
a warlord of legendary ambition.
His name was Osman Bey.
It's said that Osman had
a miraculous dream
of a magical tree
whose many branches
foretold his siring
a powerful lineage.
ATIL:
One wonders
how much of it is truth
how much of it is legend.
It makes a lovely story
and miracles are always more
easy to digest than reality.
I don't think he realized
that he was setting up
such a fantastic dynasty
a dynasty that was to rule
the crucial link
between three continents.
KINGSLEY:
The followers of Osman
became known as Ottomans.
They considered themselves
warriors for the faith
or ghazis, whose destiny was
to bring Islam to the world.
ATIL:
Ghazis were somewhat
like free-lancers
who moved the empire forward
either for ideology, theology
or for the sake
of pure conquest.
They were, probably, very brave.
Never thought about themselves
or any harm
that could come to the group
by going
into dangerous conditions
but it made the Ottoman Empire
almost fearless
going into regions that nobody
had been there before.
KINGSLEY:
For the early Ottomans
the direction of expansion
would always be to the west
for good reason.
ATIL:
They could not expand
to the east or to the south
because those were controlled
by their brothers
the Turkmen emirs, the Muslims
and a Muslim should not be
fighting against a Muslim.
So they said at the time.
So the only place
you could expand
was towards
the Christian territories
westward.
KINGSLEY:
Osman's warriors moved
to the north and west
across the Anatolian plateau
into territory controlled
by the traditional Christian
power in the area
the aging Byzantine Empire.
By Osman's time
the thousand-year-old
Byzantine Empire
was reaching the end of its age
dwindling to an isolated
stronghold in Eurasia.
The crusaders had already
wreaked havoc across the region
on their way to Jerusalem
sacking the capital city
and helping to reduce
the once-proud Byzantine empire
to a few small, warring states.
The Ottomans quickly overran
these splintered Byzantine
factions
uniting northwestern Anatolia
into a single domain.
In 1326, the Ottomans took the
powerful Byzantine city of Bursa
a victory that would change
the character
of the Ottoman Turks forever.
ATIL:
The most important part
of Bursa
was that it enabled Osman
and his descendants
to establish a seat
of the government.
KINGSLEY:
The restless nomads
of the Steppe
would settle down
to build an empire.
HOLBROOK:
What we're witnessing
is this huge demographic event:
the movement
of a whole civilization
from a nomadic way of life
to a settled way of life.
( men coughing )
HOLBROOK:
Now, when the Ottomans
took Bursa
and set it up as their capital
they were very concerned
to establish themselves
as the rightful standard bearers
of Muslim civilization.
KINGSLEY:
Civilization meant organization
and the Ottomans set out
to manage
the vast regions
they now controlled.
Leaving the Byzantine clerks
in place
they began to organize
the new empire.
First and foremost
taxation and record keeping.
The word "bureaucracy"
has since lost
its noble connotations
yet this was a great innovation
as ambitious
as any triumph in battle.
HOLBROOK:
The Ottomans are known
for including and synthesizing
the cultural elements
through the lands
that they passed.
They are known
for creating structures
by which the peoples
who lived there before
could carry on their lives
and their beliefs
in the way that they chose.
KINGSLEY:
In fact, the Ottomans had
fewer conflicts
with their Christian subjects
than those of their own faith--
Muslim adversaries intent
on challenging Ottoman rule.
HOLBROOK:
One of the bureaucratic...
or, let us say, management
problems facing the Ottomans
was that there were still
rival Muslim...
sort of proto-kingdoms
around them.
I mean, they were conquered
by the Ottomans
but they had old grudges to bear
and they had certain claims
to dynastic glory of their own
and they were constantly worried
about these old Muslim families
rising up
and creating a rebellion.
And so, the story goes
that they felt
it would be imprudent
to have the army made up
of these sorts of people.
And so, they wanted
to recruit children
who were not connected
with any rival Muslim family.
And so, they went
into the Balkans
and they recruited, primarily,
Christian children.
KINGSLEY:
This practice was called
devsirme.
The young boys were, technically
slaves of the sultan
but they weren't treated
like slaves.
First, they were brought
into the Muslim faith
taught rituals
of washing and prayer
and the Arabic and Ottoman
languages.
This served a political,
as well as a religious, purpose.
Through the devsirme system
the Ottomans could create
a caste
without any conflicting
loyalties to tribe or family.
ATIL:
The children had
such great future
that a lot of the times,
Turks or even Muslims
pretended that their children
were Christian-born
and would register them
with the devsirme officials.
The system was so beautiful
in that they only had
one allegiance: to the sultan.
No family, no region,
no other ties.
These children were then given
the best possible education
available.
In the world, perhaps,
at the time.
And they were then able
to move into the highest
positions of power
in the empire.
ATIL:
Those who were brainy
went to the palace schools
and graduated into different
levels of viziers and governors.
Even became, uh, grand viziers.
Those who were brawny went
to the Janissary corps.
KINGSLEY:
The Janissaries were
the sultan's elite infantry.
It was an army
that would set the standard
for centuries to come.
ATIL:
They were the strongest.
Trained as military machines.
No fear of dying.
Totally fearless.
And their only love was
to serve the sultan.
KINGSLEY:
They were trained
with all the precision
and discipline
pomp and circumstance
of a modern army.
For the first time
an army wore uniforms
and went into battle
to the accompaniment
of a military band.
The Janissaries
were the most feared troops
in the Western world
a force that was worthy
of this new Islamic empire
and its restless visions
of conquest.
By the middle
of the 15th century
the Ottoman Empire spread
from present-day Turkey,
known as Anatolia
deep into the Balkans
with one critical exception.
DENNY:
It must have galled
the Ottoman sultan
that with his domains
now stretching
all the way into Asia
and far, far into Europe
in the West
there remained, right
in the center of his domains
the greatest prize of all
the capital city
of Constantinople
the most powerful, the richest,
the most magnetic city
in the entire world
still in the hands of the dying,
but not yet dead
Byzantine Empire.
KINGSLEY:
To the Ottomans
Constantinople's strategic
and economic importance
was considerable.
Its symbolic significance
was even greater.
HOLBROOK:
It was the city.
There was no other city.
If you were going to rule
that area
obviously, you would rule it
from that city.
KINGSLEY:
It's said that the goal of
laying claim to Constantinople
was decreed my Muhammad himself.
Every Ottoman ruler since Osman
had wanted to seize the city
but it had always remained
firmly in Christian hands.
Then a sultan came to power
whose dreams of conquest
would not be denied.
History would honor him
as Mehmet the Conquerer.
When he assumed the sultanate,
he was only 12 years old
but he was already well versed
in Ottoman politics.
To remove any threat
of competition for power
he had his half-brother
strangled.
ATIL:
The empire always meant
everything
more so than the family.
In order to stop the empire
from splitting, as had happened
to other Turkish dynasties
ruling the Islamic world
when a young man became sultan
upon the death of his father
all the other brothers had to be
eliminated.
This prevented segmentation
of the empire.
It may have been cruel,
but it worked for the Ottomans.
When, on the death of his father
he finally then took over,
it meant an enormous change
in the policy and direction
of the Ottoman Empire
in the direction
of a much greater energy.
KINGSLEY:
Mehmet immediately set
his sights
on the one prize
as grand as his ambitions.
ATIL:
Mehmet had to conquer
Constantinople.
There was no other choice.
Constantinople was sitting
like a perfect gem
or a perfect fruit
waiting to be picked.
KINGSLEY:
By the middle
of the 15th century
the city was a shadow
of its former self.
The population had plummeted
from 400,000 to a mere 50,000.
But a besieging army would still
be at a tremendous disadvantage.
Constantinople was surrounded
on three sides by water
and massively fortified.
It was encircled
by a triple ring of walls
nearly 100 feet high
and 30 feet thick.
And they had already stood
for a thousand years.
But Mehmet had an answer
for these walls.
KARAMUSTAFA:
And part of the military
superiority of the Ottomans
came from their sophisticated
and diverse use
of the possibilities
of gunpowder.
The siege of Constantinople
in 1453
under Mehmet the Conquerer
saw the first dramatic
application of this
in the form of huge cannons
that had not been seen before
which Mehmet had specially
commissioned for the occasion.
KINGSLEY:
Earlier cannons had been
assembled
with strips of forged metal
bound with hoops.
They fired stone projectiles
with little more power
than a catapult.
A new breed of cannons could be
cast of solid bronze
and packed with enough gunpowder
to propel metal cannonballs
with staggering force.
But Mehmet was not staking
his hopes on cannon alone.
The mile-wide channel
of the Bosphorus Strait
was all that connected the city
to the Black Sea.
If he could cut it off
Constantinople would be
at his mercy.
Mehmet needed to construct
a strategically positioned
fortress to close the strait.
He built it right in the shadow
of the great city walls.
It took less than four months
to build a massive seven-tower
citadel called Rumeli Hisar.
Mehmet himself is said
to have carried stones
during its construction.
No sooner was it completed
than he tightened his noose
round the neck
of the Bosphorus.
The first ship to defy
his orders to stop was sunk
its crew decapitated
and its captain impaled
on the castle walls.
To stop Mehmet's ships
from approaching
the Byzantine strung a massive
chain across the strait.
On April 22, 1453, the besieged
city watched in horror
as Mehmet's troops hoisted
70 of his ships ashore
sliding them over land
on greased planks
past the barrier chain.
More than 100,000 Ottoman
soldiers now stood
before the walls
of Constantinople
braced for the greatest
bombardment
the history of warfare
had ever known.
( cannon fires )
Under relentless fire
the city's 7,000 Christian
defenders held out
for nearly a month.
In desperation, the Byzantines
who occupied the city appealed
to their fellow Christians
across the continent for help.
DENNY:
But, of course,
Europe in the 15th century
was completely incapable
of mounting
any kind of a concerted
opposition
to the rising Turkish threat
in the east.
KINGSLEY:
At that time,
the kings of Europe had
military and political problems
of their own.
Constantinople would have
to fend for itself.
Shortly before dawn
on May 29, 1453
the Turkish army breached
the walls of the city.
Within hours, Constantinople was
in the hands of the Ottomans.
Mehmet rode into the city
and went straight to its most
celebrated prize
the magnificent church
of Hagia Sophia.
Built by the Emperor Justinian
in the sixth century
its name meant
"The Church of Holy Wisdom."
It was the largest
enclosed space in the world.
HOLBROOK:
Surely, other groups of Muslims
and the Ottomans themselves
had come across many,
many churches.
They had seen churches before.
But they had never
seen anything...
Nobody had seen anything
like Hagia Sophia.
ATIL:
The Hagia Sophia--
or Hagia Sophia,
as it's called in Turkish--
was one of the marvels
of architecture
marvels of the world.
It had the largest
and highest dome in history.
And it was beautifully
embellished with gold mosaics
and, uh, the space is
incredible.
For Mehmet, it was
a great, uh... booty.
KINGSLEY:
Inside the church
a Turkish voice rose
proclaiming in Arabic
the first pillar of Islam:
"There is no god but God.
Muhammad is his messenger."
MAN ( chanting ):
Bismillah al-rahman al-rahim...
KINGSLEY:
The single greatest church in
Christendom was now a mosque.
( man continues chanting
in Arabic )
KINGSLEY:
The Hagia Sophia became
the inspiration
for all Ottoman domed mosques
to come
but none would ever match
its size and scope.
And it belonged
to Mehmet the Conquerer.
News of his triumph sent
shock waves around the world.
DENNY:
For Europeans, it was
a concomitant disaster.
Constantinople was, after all,
the new Rome.
It was Constantine's
capital city.
It was the symbol of Christian
dominance in the East.
KINGSLEY:
The Ottoman rulers had
long stacked up titles
for themselves:
khan, which is
Turkish for "emperor"
shahenshah,
Persian for "king of kings"
and sultan, the Arabic word
for "ruler."
But now, with all
the former Byzantine Empire
under their command
Mehmet and his successors
claimed yet another title--
Holy Roman Emperor.
The Ottomans had reached
the gates of the West
and were poised to push on
towards what they now claimed
as their ultimate destiny--
the conquest of Europe.
That quest would fall to the
most legendary sultan of all.
He was born at the beginning
of the tenth century
by the Muslim calendar
and he was the tenth sultan
descended from Osman.
He was a child of destiny
whose greatness was expected.
In the parlance of the day
he was the Sahib Qur'an
the Universal Ruler, the master
of an auspicious conjunction
whose coming has been foretold
whose identity is confirmed
astrologically.
KINGSLEY:
His name was Suleyman
after Solomon, the wise king
of the Old Testament.
The Ottoman Empire would reach
its apex under Suleyman's reign.
ATIL:
Suleyman was extremely
well educated.
He was trained to the sultanate
from the day he was born.
KINGSLEY:
As a young prince,
he formed a relationship
that would have a tremendous
impact on his life
and on the empire as well.
ATIL:
When he was still
a crown prince
he also developed a great
friendship with a convert
a Greek convert
who took the name Ibrahim.
FLEISCHER:
The two were very close in age
and apparently very close
in other ways:
personally, intellectually
uh, educated together
to a certain extent.
And as was common practice, when
Suleyman acceded to the throne
on the death of his father
he took his faithful Ibrahim
with him to Istanbul.
KINGSLEY:
Suleyman was 26
when he took the throne
determined to make his mark
on the world
as soon as his ministers
would let him.
FLEISCHER:
In his early years, Suleyman
had to contend, for example
with grand viziers and generals
who simply refused to obey him
feeling, apparently, that
here was a 26-year-old kid
who had never seen very much
in the way of action
and hadn't done very much
to show that people ought to,
in fact, obey him.
KINGSLEY:
The way to prove his mettle was
on the battlefield.
Every new sultan was expected
to begin his reign
by expanding the empire.
Ottomans now controlled
Kurdistan, Egypt
and the holiest cities of Islam,
Mecca and Medina.
Suleyman set his sights
on Belgrade in Hungary
the stepping-stone to Europe.
ATIL:
He was the head
of the Ottoman dynasty
and he had certain duties
to perform.
One was conquest.
And the first task Suleyman took
upon himself
a year after he ascended
the Ottoman throne
was to head towards Belgrade
and capture it.
Belgrade was very important
strategically
because it was from there the
army could move further on west.
KINGSLEY:
A year later
he turned his ambitions
on the island of Rhodes.
The tiny island was
a troublesome outpost
of Christianity
in an otherwise Ottoman sea.
It was also a haven for pirates
preying on Muslim trade ships.
The 50,000 defenders of Rhodes
manned one of the strongest
forts in the world.
Suleyman decided on a tactic
other than relying
on gunfire from his huge cannons
a new tactic
seldom used until that time.
KARAMUSTAFA:
The Ottomans are the first major
force to actually develop
new ways of harnessing gunpowder
to the cause of military
expansion in creative ways.
KINGSLEY:
Ottoman sappers dug out
a series of 50 tunnels
near the base of the fort
so they could mine
its foundations.
Performing this dangerous work
were expendable Christian
conscripts from the Balkans.
( loud explosion )
The resulting explosion signaled
a furious six-hour
Ottoman assault.
But the Turks were beaten back.
Then, after 145 days of siege
the exhausted
Christian defenders
finally negotiated a truce.
The Ottomans had won.
Victory did more than deliver
Rhodes to the empire.
Suleyman was now a sultan
to be taken seriously.
His march of conquest had begun.
Europe grew to fear
the name of Suleyman.
But within his own borders
he had another reputation.
Islamic history remembers him
as Kanun, the Lawgiver.
ATIL:
Ottomans were really bureaucrats
in the full sense of the word--
they kept every single record.
And in order to control
the different peoples
who participated in the world
of the Ottomans
they had to have very carefully
sorted out legal systems.
KINGSLEY:
Under Suleyman, a single
legal system was defined
for the sprawling empire.
His laws would later become
the basis of constitutions
for several other nations.
Well, Suleyman was the supreme
monarch of the area.
He was the center of the world.
KINGSLEY:
He inaugurated a classical age
in Ottoman architecture
commissioning some of
the most spectacular buildings
the world has ever seen.
HOLBROOK:
Suleyman was in a unique
position of wealth
and of consolidation,
and he focused his attention
on developing
monumental architecture
to commemorate
his great dynasty and himself.
RENARD:
Great religious architecture
can really give people a sense
of what is at the heart
of the faith.
Grandeur and majesty are
the things that come to mind
when Muslims think about God.
A building that
is grand and majestic
can immediately remind people
of the glory of God.
KINGSLEY:
Suleyman's chief architect,
Sinan, was a man
whose vision perfectly
complemented the empire builder.
Sinan perfected the signature
structure of Islam
the domed mosque.
His career spanned
half a century
and produced
well over 300 buildings
including the refurbishment
of one of the most important
monuments in Islam
the Dome of the Rock
in Jerusalem.
ATIL:
For the sultan, of course,
he built his masterpiece
the Suleymaniye Mosque
in Istanbul.
It is truly befitting Sinan,
who is called the Great Master.
These buildings were
horrendously expensive--
huge things that took many,
many years to build
and a great deal of
architectural talent
and engineering skill
and engineering experience.
When they built a mosque
like the Suleymaniye
they were doing it to say,
"Yeah, I've got the power.
"I've got the money.
I am the sultan,
I'm the king of kings."
But, at the same time
there was also tremendous
spiritual value in these things.
The symbolism is not only that
of empire but of faith.
KINGSLEY:
In the spirit
of Muhammad's teaching
the great mosque was
a center of social services
complete with a hospital,
school and library.
At its inauguration, it's said
Suleyman gazed at it with awe
and exclaimed, "Oh, Solomon,
I have surpassed thee."
No less impressive
was Suleyman's palace.
Topkapi was both
the seat of government
and his private dwelling.
ATIL:
Suleyman was also
a great patron of the arts.
And since the empire
was very rich
the best artisans were there.
So everything
started flourishing.
The architecture
or the arts of his period
show the first golden age
of the Ottoman world.
Everything that came out
of his palace was exquisite.
Suleyman himself
was a goldsmith.
Ottomans believed that every
sultan had to have
a tangible trade.
Being a sultan
was not considered
a practical or a tangible trade.
And he was
a very demanding patron--
insisted on checking the work.
He even commissioned
a few things.
And I think each artisan group,
or each corps
working for the palace
tried to outdo one another
to please the sultan
because to please him
had wonderful rewards.
KARAMUSTAFA:
And the Ottomans, of course,
exercised quite a lot
of influence
on the European imagination
and the royal and the political,
if you will
ceremony and pomp
of the Ottomans
was such that it would have
humbled, um, any citizen
of the known world then.
This was arguably one of
the greatest world empires
and European observers
could not walk away
without feeling of respect
for the sheer power
of the Ottomans.
KINGSLEY:
In public, Suleyman required
that all those around him
remain completely silent
while he made his wishes known
with the slightest nod
or gesture.
FLEISCHER:
It must have been
a tremendously impressive sight
to see the courtyard
of the palace
filled with
some 6,000 or 7,000 Janissaries
and other functionaries--
no one saying a word.
What's going on here was
the creation of a sovereignty
so mysterious
and yet so far-reaching
as to be seen as nearly divine.
KINGSLEY:
As Suleyman's power grew
his lifelong friend, Ibrahim,
rose in the court structure.
ATIL:
And Ibrahim Pasha--
who became a pasha later on--
became his devoted grand vizier.
In fact, Ibrahim
married his sister.
So, they were not only good
friends, they were also related.
KINGSLEY:
Ibrahim campaigned
with his own army
growing in influence
and ambition
till his power
was second only to Suleyman's.
But for power and ambition
the secret world of the sultan's
harem had no equal.
Contrary
to the Western stereotype
it was not the sultan's playpen
but lay at the center
of dynastic power.
HOLBROOK:
The harem was the private
quarters of the sultan.
We tend to think of the harem
as where the women live.
But what it means is "the place
where you're not on display."
"Home" is what it means.
KINGSLEY:
Islam allowed the sultan
four wives and many concubines.
HOLBROOK:
It was a system designed
to produce heirs
is what it was.
When you look into
the actual details
of how these things
were carried out
it was hardly anything
terribly erotic.
I mean, the sultan
did not have much choice
in his selection
of female companions.
The sultan was not in a position
to look around and say
"I want her," you know
because his mother would have
a lot to say about it.
KINGSLEY:
With his first wife, Suleyman
had a son and heir, Mustafa.
But while he was in his mid-30s
the sultan fell deeply in love
with a Slavic slave girl
named Hurrem.
In the West, we know her
by a different name, Roxellana.
Roxellana would bear him
a rival heir
and become Suleyman's
most trusted confidante.
HOLBROOK:
The sultan was supposed
to be protected
from any undue influences.
He was supposed to be protected
from any rivals.
And, in a way, this creates
a vacuum around his person
into which the harem life
can enter.
And so the fact
that he was so protected
works in a funny way
to expose him to the influence
of his female companions, with
whom he spends so much time.
And there were
tremendously intelligent
and ambitious women around him--
Roxellana being
the most famous of all.
DENNY:
Suleyman is
a complex character--
a man that we
know from his own life
was capable of
the tenderest emotions
both toward his male friends
and especially toward, uh,
the great love of his life
his wife, Hurrem Sultan,
and toward his family as well.
He had a number
of extremely talented sons
on whom he lavished
a great deal of affection.
KINGSLEY:
Suleyman groomed his firstborn
son, Mustafa, for power.
In the Ottoman tradition
the young prince
entered the military
and quickly won recognition
as a talented general.
Mustafa was clearly
the heir apparent.
For Suleyman, the future
of his empire seemed limitless.
"I am God's slave
and sultan of this world"
Suleyman would carve
on a conquered fortress.
"I am Suleyman, in whose name
"the Friday sermon
is read in Mecca and Medina.
"In Baghdad, I am the shah
"in the Byzantine realms,
I am the Caesar
and in Egypt, the sultan."
KARAMUSTAFA:
He, of course,
at the height of his powers
clearly saw himself
as dwarfing all his rivals...
perhaps rightly so.
KINGSLEY:
One of Suleyman's
greatest rivals
was to the east, the empire
of the Persian Safavids.
This was a Muslim enemy
whose rival creed
made them fierce antagonists
of the Ottomans for centuries.
HOLBROOK:
The Safavids were also Turkic
in their ethnic origins
and, indeed, spoke Turkish
as a language of daily life.
But they were moving
into the Muslim world--
unlike the Ottomans,
who were moving into the West.
ATIL:
So, for the Ottoman Empire, they
formed, sort of, the boundaries
the easternmost boundaries
of the Ottoman realm.
KINGSLEY:
The Safavid dynasty
was Shiite Muslims--
bitter rivals
to the Sunni Ottomans.
RENARD:
According to the Shiites
a leader had to be designated
by his predecessor
and had to be
of the family of Muhammad.
According to the Sunni view
it was not designation
that was necessary
and a person could be a leader
of the community
without being a direct
descendant of Muhammad.
KINGSLEY:
This challenge to legitimacy
is the basis
of the Shiite/Sunni split--
a bitter division that still
separates the Muslim world
to this day.
HOLBROOK:
And I would say
the Ottomans never really
thought of themselves
so much as Sunni
until the Safavids came forth
as this rival Shii.
So the Safavis developed a rival
ideology to the Ottomans
which then became
an occasion for war
over, of course, what wars
are usually fought over.
Wars are fought over land,
over wealth
over territory, over prestige.
And the Safavis waged
a war of ideology
in eastern Anatolia
which was always,
for the Ottomans
the most worrisome part.
The terrain is difficult to
conquer, difficult to control.
KINGSLEY:
The Safavid military
rywas formidable
but they were cultural rivals
to the Ottomans, as well.
ATIL:
They were great patrons
of the arts.
I think we know them more
for their artistic patronage
than of their great conquests
and laws
and systems and administration.
When you look at Isfahan
it is the most beautiful city
in the world
and that is the Safavid city.
It's the Safavid capital.
But it doesn't give you
the same sense of power
that the Ottoman Empire had
or the Ottoman capital had.
It's a different sense of power.
It's more eloquent, perhaps
more precious in its decoration
and its ceremonial spaces.
It's a totally different aspect
of Islam.
Safavi art and architecture
is on a finer scale.
It's known... it's known
for its filigree.
It's known for its intricate
brushwork, you know
rather than
for its stunning scale.
KINGSLEY:
In the soaring palaces
of the Safavid shahs
murderous intrigues
against Suleyman
and his dynasty were hatched
that would reach
into his very household.
But Suleyman's eyes
were on the West
where a fragmented
and vulnerable Europe
awaited his conquest.
The Ottoman Empire
encompassed everything
from Egypt to Kurdistan,
and he now had Hungary, as well.
KARAMUSTAFA:
But he had ambitions
of going beyond that
and actually bringing
the larger portions
of the world known to him--
if not all of it--
under his control.
KINGSLEY:
Suleyman's next step
would be Vienna.
Its conquest would drive
a dagger into the heart
of the European Habsburg Empire
and open the way to the West.
But as the heavily armed
Ottomans set out for Vienna
the weather turned against them.
KINGSLEY:
The heavy cannon
that had swept the Ottomans
to victory after victory,
bogged down in the mud.
Suleyman had to move on
without them.
With only light artillery
the Ottomans relentlessly
shelled the city
but the smallest breach
was ferociously defended.
After a lengthy siege
with winter fast approaching
Suleyman withdrew his forces.
He was not concerned.
He was sure he would return
soon enough.
He never did.
HOLBROOK:
Suleyman's failure to take
Vienna was pivotal for Europe.
It was the first major defeat
after a long time.
The Europeans had been losing
and losing and losing.
And this was the dawn
of a new day for Europe.
KINGSLEY:
But Suleyman had little to fear
from Europe.
Rival Muslim Safavids
and his own family
would bring the cruelest
of sorrows to the sultan
and, ultimately, to his empire,
as well.
DENNY:
Suleyman, in some ways
serves as a sort of epitome
of the 16th-century idea
of the wise and just ruler
who is, at the same time,
a very tragic figure.
KINGSLEY:
In the power-laden world
of the sultan's household
the intrigues never ceased.
ATIL:
The Topkapi Palace, as it
was originally conceived
had no quarters for the ladies.
The women lived in what
was called the Old Palace
but Hurrem always complained
about her husband--
as most wives would--
spending too many days
and months campaigning
outside the capital.
She kept saying
she feels very lonely
and the children miss him.
Well, surprisingly, there
was a fire in the Old Palace--
fire in Hurrem's quarters.
So she had to be moved to
the Topkapi Palace temporarily
while her old quarters
were being renovated.
Well, she moved in
and never moved out.
KINGSLEY:
Now, Hurrem was
at the center of power
promoting her own son
as heir apparent
and immersing herself in a web
of deadly gossip and suspicion.
ATIL:
She was incredibly devoted
to her husband
and any threat to Suleyman
was a threat to her
and she had to get rid of it.
The first, uh, threat came
from Ibrahim Pasha
who assumed titles
that were only given to sultans.
So Hurrem knew something
was going to happen eventually
and to protect the empire
and the dynasty
Ibrahim Pasha had to go.
KINGSLEY:
On March 15, 1536
Suleyman and Ibrahim Pasha
dined together
as was their custom.
In the morning, Ibrahim's body
was found, strangled.
But Suleyman's desolation
and loss had only begun.
A few years after
Ibrahim's death
Hurrem claimed
to have uncovered a plot
to overthrow Suleyman
devised with Safavid help
by his beloved first-born
son and heir, Mustafa.
KARAMUSTAFA:
This is a continuous problem
in Ottoman history--
sons trying to eventually
replace their father.
This happens in monarchies.
Succession could
become a problem
and it was an acute problem
and Suleyman had his share of it
and perhaps did not always
play his hands right.
KINGSLEY:
Without hesitation, Suleyman
ordered Mustafa's execution
then sat by the young man's body
for days
refusing to allow anyone
to touch him.
The best hope for
the empire's future was dead.
When Hurrem herself died
the following year
Suleyman fell deeper
into despair
finding solace in his poetry.
ATIL:
Most of the poetry, I think,
was written
after he lost his wife
since he talks about the
loneliness of being in office
that he has nobody left anymore
and he's dying to join her.
KINGSLEY:
"Even if your reign
on the imperial throne
"seems everlasting,
don't be taken in.
"One day, a hostile wind
will blow
"and bring to your land
of beauty
heaven's misfortune
and deepest suffering."
In all his loneliness, there was
only one refuge for the sultan
whose power, like his sorrow,
seemed limitless.
He returned to the field
of battle
to the work of conquest.
ATIL:
He personally led 13 campaigns.
The last one was at Szigetvar,
which is in Hungary now.
I think he knew that this was
going to be his last campaign.
He personally led it
knowing that he would
not come back alive.
KINGSLEY:
In 1561, the man who had ruled
the empire longer than any other
died in his grand war pavilion,
surrounded by his generals.
He was 67.
No Ottoman sultan would ever
achieve his greatness again.
The nexus of world power would
move from the Mediterranean Sea
to the Atlantic Ocean
and the New World
slowly leaving
the Ottomans behind.
In Istanbul today,
the Sufi dervishes still turn
with the same prayerful
pirouettes they danced
in Suleyman's day.
It is a meditation in motion
whose mystic origins
go back even further
to the time
of the prophet Muhammad.
"You have become
the best community
ever raised up in mankind," the
Qur'an assures all believers
"enjoining the right
and forbidding the wrong
and having faith in God."
Islamic and Western civilization
have the same roots:
their dawning
in the Fertile Crescent;
the monotheism of the Jews
and Christians;
the classical, intellectual
culture of the ancient Greeks.
The two traditions
are kindred spirits
alike, yet very different.
Islam's legacy is intertwined
with the West's
and to the millions of Muslims
who make it the second largest
religion in the world
it is a living legacy...
an elemental part
of the great human venture
that is world civilization.
Islam: Empire of Faith continues
at BS Online.
Click through our
interactive timeline
to learn more about the history
and culture of Islam
or take a virtual tour
of the Dome of the Rock
and other extraordinary sites.
It's all online at pbs.org
or America Online Keyword: PBS.